---
title: Physics-Informed Neural Network Diffusion Equation (PINNDE)
layout: gsoc_proposal
project: GENIE
year: 2026
organization:
 - Alabama
 - FSU
 - Fermilab
---

## Description
There is much interest in building ultra-fast samplers that map a density that is easy to sample from, typically, an n-dimensional normal to a desired n-dimensional density. One way to compute this mapping is to solve the reverse-time diffusion equation [1], which is an integro-differential equation. In Ref. [2], the integral in this equation is approximated using Monte Carlo integration where the integrand is averaged over N (~5K – 10K) points sampled from the desired distribution. Solving this equation is relatively slow, therefore, typically a neural network is trained to model the mapping from the normal to the desired density using training data generated by repeatedly solving the differential equation.  

In last year's work, an alternative approach was investigated: modeling the solution to the differential equation using a physics-informed neural network (PINN) [3]. There is a large upfront cost in training the PINN, but this is subsequently amortized over the fast sampling using the PINN. This project extends last year's work by solving the reverse-time diffusion equation on the generated PINN to evaluate the physical realism of PINN models.

## Duration
Total project length: 175/350 hours.

## Difficulty Level
  * Intermediate/Advanced

## Task ideas
* Use CaloChallenge (Dataset 2 with ~6,400 voxels), build an accurate autoencoder of the showers.
* Use the code developed in 2025 \[6\] for solving the reverse-time diffusion equation to map an d-dimensional standard normal to the d-dimensional latent space from step 1 and verify that we can accurately simulate showers.
* Produce an accurate ML model of the q(t, x) d-dimensional vector field, tagged by the log of the energy of the incident particle that appears in the ODE and use the ML model for q(t, x) in lieu of the Monte Carlo approximation of q(t, x) used in the 2025 version of the reverse-time equation solver. I would expect a significant speed improvement in shower generation.
* Finally, try to solve the reverse-time equation using a PINN, building on the promising results from last year. If this succeeds, we would have a superfast, accurate, particle shower generator.
* Compare this approach with published CaloChallenge approaches and include our work and these comparisons in a ML paper.

## Expected results
* Trained graph-based jet classifier
* Benchmarks on selected datasets

## Test
* Using PyTorch, solve the damped harmonic oscillator [5] using a PINN. Choose fixed initial conditions:  
  x(0) = x₀, dx/dz(0) = v₀, with x₀ = 0.7 and v₀ = 1.2.  
  Condition the PINN on damping ratios in the range ξ = 0.1 to 0.4.  
  Solve on the domain z ∈ [0, 20]:  
  d²x/dz² + 2ξ·dx/dz + x = 0

<!-- ## Test 
Please use [this link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/142YpKV7fJ49zaBZkSBekbBzw43KD71No2K_Jd-n5Neo/edit?usp=sharing) to access the test for this project. -->
  
## Requirements 
  * Experience with numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. 
  * Familiarity with PyTorch.  

## Difficultly Level
Advanced

## Mentors
  * [Harrison B. Prosper](mailto:ml4-sci@cern.ch) (Florida State University)
  * [Pushpalatha Bhat](mailto:ml4-sci@cern.ch) (Fermilab)
  * [Sergei Gleyzer](mailto:ml4-sci@cern.ch) (University of Alabama)
 

## Links
1. Cheng Lu†, Yuhao Zhou†, Fan Bao†, Jianfei Chen†, Chongxuan Li‡, Jun Zhu, DPM-Solver: A Fast ODE Solver for Diffusion Probabilistic Model Sampling in Around 10 Steps, arXiv:2206.00927v3, 13 Oct 2022. 

2. Yanfang Lui, Minglei Yang, Zezhong Zhang, Feng Bao, Yanzhao Cao, and Guannan Zhang, Diffusion-Model-Assisted Supervised Learning of Generative Models for Density Estimation, arXiv:2310.14458v1, 22 Oct 2023. 

3. S. Cuomo et al., Scientific Machine Learning through Physics-Informed Neural Networks: Where we are and What's next, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2201.05624. 

4. https://calochallenge.github.io/homepage/ 

5. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonic_oscillator

6. https://medium.com/@sijiljose.999/gsoc-2025-with-ml4sci-part-i-physics-informed-neural-network-for-diffusion-equation-pinnde-491d46a5b84d

 

Please **DO NOT** contact mentors directly by email. General questions can be directed to [ml4-sci@cern.ch](mailto:ml4-sci@cern.ch). To submit your proposal, CV, and test task solutions, please use [this Google form](https://forms.gle/SPXo8kSwHHptcBmk9).
